--- page 1 ---

Introduction
Marek Kozłowski
Faculty of Mathematics and Information Sciences
Warsaw University of Technology

--- page 2 ---

Outline of the Lecture
1 Booting Unix
2 Display Managers and TTYs
3 Desktop Environments

--- page 3 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Booting Unix
2 Display Managers and TTYs
3 Desktop Environments

--- page 4 ---

BIOS MBR vs UEFI GPT
Modern GNU/Linux distros and BSD systems can use either
BIOS or UEFI.
Enabled UEFI Secure Boot however can result in strange booting
problems for non-Windows systems and therefore disabling it
should be considered whenever possible.
For security, stability, simplicity and compatibility reasons
numerous *nix administrators prefer using UEFI in legacy (BIOS
mode).
The next slide describes legacy BIOS MBR solution for better
clarity but it’s worth mentioning that key concepts from our
point of view are the same as for UEFI GPT systems.

--- page 5 ---

Boot Manager
First HDD sector (512B) is called a Master Boot Record (MBR).
MBR contains a boot loader and a partition table.
Boot loader is a small program that invokes an OS loader
(stage2 loader) from a respective partition.
Multiple OSes may be installed into disk partitions.
Boot manager is a boot loader that allows choosing an OS to be
initialized.
Windows used to assume that no other OSes are installed.
BSD boot managers (boot0) offer selecting a boot partition and
have no further configuration.
Modern Linux distributions typically come with the GNU
GRUB boot manager.

--- page 6 ---

GRUB Boot Manager
GRUB1 (0.97, legacy):
follows the KISS (Keep It Simple, Stupid!) principle,
requires manual installation,
single configuration file with simple syntax,
limited to drives below 2TB,
may not support most recent versions of the ext4 filesystem,
doesn’t support UEFI.
GRUB2:
supports UEFI, drives over 2TB and all ext4 versions,
configuration file generated automagically based on numerous
input files and os-prober software,
configuration file should NOT be edited by hand.

--- page 7 ---

UEFI
Solution present on modern amd64 (Intel x86 64-bit architecture)
computers.
Replaces BIOS with programmable interface.
Instead of the MBR a dedicated EFI partition (FAT32) is
requisite.
Several boot manages (for example GRUB) may be copied
simultaneously to EFI partition (as files).
efibootmgr utility (Linux/BSD) allows registering those boot
manages in UEFI and setting the default one.

--- page 8 ---

Booting Unix
Unix boot-up sequence:
1 loading, uncompressing and initializing a kernel,
2 detecting devices and loading drivers,
3 initializing a process tree,
4 connecting mass storage (mounting file systems),
5 starting daemons (services); typically confirmed by some kind of
[OK] messages.
After the boot-up sequence has finished users may log in via a tty or
a display manager.

--- page 9 ---

Splash Screen
Optional software that displays animations instead of boot-up
messages.
Some Linux distributions, especially those intended for
inexperienced users may start it by default.
Can be uninstalled or disabled.
Usually there are key combinations (try pressing <F2> or
<Ctrl><F2>) that allow switching to other views.

--- page 10 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Booting Unix
2 Display Managers and TTYs
3 Desktop Environments

--- page 11 ---

Display Manager
Optional, OS-independent piece of software.
Typically started as a daemon/service.
Initializes graphical mode.
Displays login dialog (and possibly some options).
Starts a desktop environment according to user’s choices.
Popular DM software:
xdm,
gdm,
kdm,
lightdm (used in our labs),
slim.

--- page 12 ---

Teletyping Terminal (tty)
Unix has been designed as a multiuser OS.
Separation of processing and user interface is a key concept.
A tty is an input/output hardware typically consisting of:
keyboard/mouse for text stream input,
monitor for text stream output.
A tty can be:
physically connected (directly or via a KVM switch),
emulated by terminal emulator applications running locally in a
GUI mode,
connected remotely over a TCP/IP network (ssh, telnet).

--- page 13 ---

Linux and *BSD TTYs
Physically connected keyboard/mouse and monitor can be used
for first 12 ttys.
Users can switch between them by pressing <Alt><Fx> (function
keys).
Due to possible GUI key re-mappings in graphical mode use
<Ctrl><Alt><Fx> sequence.
Usually first 4-6 ttys run getty software that allows login.
Switching to the first one unassociated (try tty7 or tty8)
typically returns to a GUI mode.
Some other ones (often: tty12) may be used for displaying most
recent log entries (syslog daemon).

--- page 14 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Booting Unix
2 Display Managers and TTYs
3 Desktop Environments

--- page 15 ---

Desktop Environment
OS-independent bundle of graphical applications.
Core components started together offer a shell-independent GUI
interface to the system.
Applications that form a DE share common architecture and
design principles.
Typical components include:
desktop,
window manager,
panels and applets,
file manager,
terminal emulator,
session manager,
control center.

--- page 16 ---

Desktop Environment (2)
Applications that form a DE work as any other applications (for
example: web browsers), in particular:
several DEs may be installed into a single system,
several instances of the same or different DEs may be started
simultaneously,
some flexible DEs allow replacing some components with parts of
other DEs.
DEs may be started from a tty (startx, etc.) although using
display managers is highly recommended.
Local DE users may be granted additional privileges to periphery
devices, multimedia and removable storage as well as to a system
power control via dedicated applications.

--- page 17 ---

Underlying Libraries
X Window System (X11, X) provides basic graphical
functionality:
input drivers,
graphical drivers and accelerators,
fonts,
libraries that allow using graphical primitives (lines, dots, circles,
etc.).
Widgets libraries (over X) offer building blocks for interfaces:
windows, menus, buttons, toolbars, scrollbars, dialog windows,
etc.
Most DEs are built on the top of one of the following two widget
libraries:
GTK+ (GIMP Toolkit),
Qt.

--- page 18 ---

X Window and Wayland
X Window is a modular, architecture-independent solution being
developed since late ’80.
X Window is considered sub-optimal while insecure for modern
high-performance graphical workstations.
Many Unix-like operating systems intended for workstation use
(mostly Linux distros) are migrating to modern X replacement
called Wayland.
Some desktop environments and non-Linux systems may still not
offer stable support for Wayland.

--- page 19 ---

GTK+ (GIMP Toolkit)
Originally written in C (although there are bindings for most
languages).
Programming high level languages with GTK+ is relatively easy.
Using GTK+ in C programs requires advanced programming
skills (casting structure and function pointers).
Free software (GNU LGPL).
Well supported on all Unix systems.
Ported to other platforms (including Windows).
Three versions co-exist: GTK2 (obsolete), GTK3 (legacy) and
GTK4 (current).
website: https://www.gtk.org

--- page 20 ---

Qt
Originally written in C++ (although there are bindings for other
object-oriented languages).
Easier for beginners in comparison to GTK+.
Initially proprietary software of Trolltech (free of charge for
non-commercial use). Later releases are cross-licensed.
Best support under Linux. Support under commercial Unices
varies.
Ported to other platforms (including Windows). Well supported
on mobile devices.
Three versions co-exist: Qt4 (obsolete), Qt5 (legacy) and Qt6
(current).
website: https://www.qt.io

--- page 21 ---

Popular Free Desktop Environments
GTK+:
MATE (GNOME2-lite),
GNOME3, GNOME4,
XFCE,
LXDE,
Cinammon, etc.
Qt:
KDE,
LXQt.

--- page 22 ---

Stable and Unstable Releases
GNOME, MATE and XFCE follow the same version numbering
scheme: X.Y.Z, where:
X (major number) – main line,
Y (minor number) – version/release:
even number indicates a stable (end-user, final) release,
odd number indicates an unstable (development, under way)
release.
Z (revision number) – a bugfix sub-release; bugs fixed, no new
features added.
The same convention is commonly accepted by numerous free and
open projects.

--- page 23 ---

GNOME2
GTK2-based desktop environment:
for many years de facto standard DE for Unices and Linuces,
defines HIG (Human Interface Guidelines) – rules for designing
user-friendly, uniform, intuitive, clear interfaces,
the most user-friendly and easy-to-use DE,
moderately eye-candy but functional,
complete set of (integrated) applications for misc. purposes
included,
reduced configuration options (criticized by many inc. Linus
Torvalds),
large, heavy, resource-consuming, inflexible, tightly integrated,
subsequent stable releases every 6 months; abandoned since 2011.

--- page 24 ---

GNOME3 and GNOME4
GTK3-based project started in 2011:
a controversial, completely new, modern interface similar to
those designed for mobile devices,
no usual elements like a desktop, panels, main menu etc,
limited configuration and customization,
heavy, inflexible, tightly integrated,
initially received a very critical reception,
stable releases every 6 months,
website: https://www.gnome.org
Introducing GTK4 library resulted in changing major number to
GNOME4.

--- page 25 ---

XFCE
GTK+ (GTK3) desktop environment:
GNOME compatible,
compliant with HIG and other open standards,
modular, lightweight, minimalistic, simple and flexible,
fully functional and feature-rich,
slightly old-fashioned look, especially with default configuration,
subsequent stable releases when we have finished,
website: https://www.xfce.org

--- page 26 ---

MATE
GTK+ desktop environment:
based on abandoned GNOME2 code (all sub-project names
changed),
rewritten to GTK3,
limited to only core components, non critical ones removed (aka
GNOME2-lite),
development aims at making it more lightweight, flexible and
configurable,
features and requirements comparable to XFCE,
new stable releases every 6 months (same as GNOME),
website: https://www.mate-desktop.org

--- page 27 ---

LXDE
GTK+ (GTK2 and GTK3) desktop environment:
similar to XFCE and MATE,
aimed at providing functional DE for older and slower computers,
lowest resource consumption,
heterogeneous; re-uses components of other DEs,
lightweight and flexible but some incoherences and design issues
do exist,
rolling release model for components, no releases of a whole DE,
website: https://www.lxde.org

--- page 28 ---

KDE
The most popular Qt desktop environment:
numerous Windows users find it easy and natural,
the most eye-candy and full of bells and whistles,
highly configurable,
doesn’t follow HIG recommendations,
huge, heavy, resource consuming, inflexible, de facto monolithic,
website: https://www.kde.org

--- page 29 ---

LXQt
LXDE clone ported from GTK+ to Qt.
Initially intended as a replacement for LXDE; finally those two
projects co-exist.
Website: https://lxqt-project.org

--- page 30 ---

Freedesktop.org
An initiative for DE interoperability:
standard libraries, communication routines and configuration file
formats,
common font rendering engines,
unified description files for adding applications to menu entries,
standardized icon themes,
common directories/files for desktop, trashbin, etc.
applications designed for GTK+ environments should look
natively under Qt environments and vice versa.