--- page 1 ---

Basic Shell Commands
Marek Kozłowski
Faculty of Mathematics and Information Sciences
Warsaw University of Technology

--- page 2 ---

Outline of the Lecture
1 Manual
2 Session Utilities
3 Gathering User and System Information
4 File Viewing and Editing
5 File Management
6 Dealing with Archives
7 File Finding

--- page 3 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Manual
2 Session Utilities
3 Gathering User and System Information
4 File Viewing and Editing
5 File Management
6 Dealing with Archives
7 File Finding

--- page 4 ---

Manual (man)
For help on any command, file name, system call, C function or
general topic man pages are provided.
✍We can display a man page on the man command:
Getting help on the man command
$ man man
Man page navigation:
q – quit,
<SPACE> – next page,
nG – go to line number n,
G – go to the last line,
/pattern – search forward for pattern; special characters in
pattern need to be escaped,
n – next occurrence,
N – previous occurrence.

--- page 5 ---

Man Page Structure
Most man pages are organized following the same scheme:
NAME,
SYNOPSIS,
DESCRIPTION,
OPTIONS,
RETURN VALUE,
FILES (related files),
SEE ALSO (names with section numbers for man pages),
AUTHORS and BUG REPORTS.

--- page 6 ---

Manual Sections
The manual is organized into 8 sections numbered as follows
(some System V systems can have 4, 5 and 7 swapped):
1 User Commands,
2 System Calls,
3 C Library Functions,
4 Devices and Special Files,
5 File Formats and Conventions,
6 Games et. Al.,
7 Miscellanea,
8 System Administration tools and Deamons.
Supplemental POSIX sections can be defined. They share the
same numbers followed by the letter P (for example: 1P for
POSIX-compliant commands).
Names with numbers in parenthesis (for example: kill(1),
kill(3P)) refer to man pages in specific sections.

--- page 7 ---

Selecting Manual Sections
man with no options displays the first matching man page.
We can specify the section number for man to seek.
When in doubt we can request man pages on given name from all
sections (the -a option). They are displayed in sequence.
✍Note that section numbers are not preceded with dash
(-) opposite to other options:
Specifying man sections
$ man kill # first match
$ man 1 kill # help on ‘kill’ command
$ man 2 kill # help on ‘kill’ system call
$ man -a kill # all man pages on ‘kill’

--- page 8 ---

Man Pages on Files and Functions
Don’t specify parenthesis for functions.
Specify configuration or device files with no paths; use respective
section numbers instead.
Omit instance numbers.
Man pages on files and functions
$ man 3 printf # not: man printf()
$ man 5 passwd # not: man /etc/passwd
$ man 4 sd # not: man /dev/sda2

--- page 9 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Manual
2 Session Utilities
3 Gathering User and System Information
4 File Viewing and Editing
5 File Management
6 Dealing with Archives
7 File Finding

--- page 10 ---

Secure SHell (SSH) Protocol
Allows connecting a remote tty (or a tty emulator application)
over a TCP/IP network.
Provides a secure communication channel.
Disconnecting or closing a terminal results in killing all processes
within the current SSH session.
Under Windows use the PuTTY client (https://putty.org):
works under 32-bit and 64-bit systems,
single exe file, no installation needed,
FLOSS license (open source).
Under Unix use the ssh command.

--- page 11 ---

ssh Command
Connecting to a remote host via SSH:
$ ssh [username@]hostname[.domainname]
Username and domainname can be omitted if they are the same for
client and server hosts.

--- page 12 ---

GNU screen Utility
screen starts a new shell instance which is terminal
independent. We can detach it from a terminal (and even log
out) and attach to any other we are logged in if required.
screen is especially useful when performing time-consuming
tasks like: system upgrade, backup or complex computations.
The most standard procedures include:
screen – start a session in screen,
<Ctrl><A> <D> – detach current session from terminal,
screen -r – re-attach a session running in screen,
screen -rD – re-attach a session running in screen; detach it first
if necessary,
exit – end current session.
If multiple screen instances are running, we are requested to
select screen’s ID when re-attaching (screen -rD somenumber ).

--- page 13 ---

script Utility
script makes a copy of everything printed on terminal and saves
it into the ./typescript file.
typescript may contain non-ASCII characters (colors and other
terminal control sequences).
The exit command ends a script.
script is commonly used inside sessions running in screen mode.

--- page 14 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Manual
2 Session Utilities
3 Gathering User and System Information
4 File Viewing and Editing
5 File Management
6 Dealing with Archives
7 File Finding

--- page 15 ---

Date and Time: date, cal
date displays or sets date and time. There are syntax differences
between implementations, consult your manual for details. For
GNU date usage examples see Shell Syntax Basics (the slide:
Command Syntax Substitution).
remember: For displaying the current time use the date
command. The time command is designed for different purpose
(measuring command execution time).
cal displays a calendar: with no parameter the current month;
cal -y – the whole year. Other options can vary.

--- page 16 ---

System Information: uname
uname displays system name (for example: Linux). Common
querying options include:
-m – hardware platform,
-n – host name,
-p – processor,
-r – kernel,
uname -a prints all available information.
✍Sample uname -a output for a Linux system:
uname information
$ uname -a
Linux alpha.mini.pw.edu.pl 2.6.36-gentoo-r5 #1 SMP
Thu Jan 27 12:47:37 CET 2011 x86 64 Intel(R) Xeon(R)
CPU L5420 @ 2.50GHz GenuineIntel GNU/Linux

--- page 17 ---

Hardware Information (Linux)
The following command may be available:
lscpu ,
lspci ,
lsusb .
The -v options increases verbosity of the last two ones.
Use some Linux LiveCD distro with those tools for examining a
new hardware.

--- page 18 ---

RAM Usage: free
The free command displays information on total and free
memory.
Free memory can be used as buffers/cache for increasing system
performance. It can be freed immediately shall the need arise.
Some implementations support the -h option (human readable
output – in kilobytes, megabytes, gigabytes, etc. rather than
bytes).

--- page 19 ---

User Identity: id
The id displays the user and group names and IDs.
Querying other users by name is possible with id username .
The two utilities: whoami and groups which display current user
name and user groups names are now obsoleted by id -un and
id -Gn username respectively.
A separate presentation is dedicated to user identities and groups.

--- page 20 ---

User Information: finger (obsolete)
finger is a user information lookup program.
It is possible to search by user’s system or real names.
The mail information can be inaccurate for some mailbox
formats. Other information (for example: a PGP key) may be
included.
✍Information returned by finger:
Getting user information
$ finger smith
Login: smithj
Name: John Smith
Directory: /home/smithj
Shell: /bin/bash
Last login: Fri Mar 4 08:00 (CET)
on pts/0 from somehost.somedomain.com
No mail.
No plan.

--- page 21 ---

Currently Logged In Users: who, w
who displays who is on the system.
w displays logged in users and the commands they’re running.
write username [terminal ] sends a message to a user.
Specifying the terminal is necessary only if a user is logged on
more than once.
mesg [y /n ] enables/disables incoming messages. With no
parameter current status is displayed.

--- page 22 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Manual
2 Session Utilities
3 Gathering User and System Information
4 File Viewing and Editing
5 File Management
6 Dealing with Archives
7 File Finding

--- page 23 ---

echo and cat
echo displays a line of text interpreted by the shell. It is
commonly used for testing commands with special characters.
cat displays con-cat-enated files content on stdout (default: the
screen). With -n it precedes each line with a line number.
cat should be used for files containing control sequences for a
terminal (e.g. typescipt).

--- page 24 ---

File Viewing (1): more, less
more displays files in paged mode (one screen a time). The
<SPACE> key scrolls one page down. No backward scrolling is
possible.
less is the most advanced file viewer. It is used by default by
man for displaying man pages, so the same navigation commands
do apply. less is especially useful for examining large files (for
example: log files).

--- page 25 ---

File Viewing (2): head, tail
head displays the first part of files (by default: 10 lines). The -n
option allows specifying the number of lines.
tail is similar to head except it prints the last lines. The -f
option appends output when the file grows. It may be useful for
log file tracing.
✍A default log file is /var/log/messages. Normal users
are usually not allowed to read it:
Tracing a default syslog-ng log file
# tail -f /var/log/messages

--- page 26 ---

Easy Editors
For the very basic editing of ASCII files one or more of the
following editors may be available:
nano (or pico) – a GNU editor default for most Linux
systems. The list of available commands is displayed in the
bottom panel. The ˆ symbol denotes the <CTRL> key,
joe – simple editor similar to nano. The help panel is
available too, all time the status bar informs:
Ctrl-K H for help,
ee (Easy Editor) – the basic editor for BSD systems.
The EDITOR environment variable defines the default editor.

--- page 27 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Manual
2 Session Utilities
3 Gathering User and System Information
4 File Viewing and Editing
5 File Management
6 Dealing with Archives
7 File Finding

--- page 28 ---

Directory Navigation (1) – pwd, ls
pwd (Path to Working Directory) displays working (current)
directory.
ls lists directory contents sorted by names. A file name instead
of directory name can be given. If no name is specified it lists
current directory. The most common options include:
-a – include entries which names start with ‘.’ (hidden files),
-A – same as -a except . and .. directories,
-l – long listing (rights, owners, size, modification date etc.),
-R – recursive listing,
sorting options:
-r – reverse order,
-S – by size,
-t – by modification time,
-X – by extension.

--- page 29 ---

Directory Navigation (2) – cd
cd – changes working directory. Relative names are allowed. If no
directory name is specified it changes to the directory stored in
$HOME. We can change to the most recent directory by cd - .
✍Let’s assume that our home is /home/smithj and we
just switched working directory to the /etc. The following
commands are equivalent:
Changing working directory
$ cd /home/smithj
$ cd
$ cd $HOME
$ cd ~
$ cd ../home/smithj
$ cd -

--- page 30 ---

Creating New Files and Directories: touch, mkdir
touch updates file timestamps (access and last modification
times). If the file doesn’t exist a new empty one is created.
mkdir creates directories. mkdir -p creates a multi-level
structure if necessary.
✍Note than mkdir -p doesn’t return error on directory
presence:
Creating a multi-level directory structure
$ mkdir sub1/sub2/sub3
mkdir error: No such file or directory!
$ mkdir -p sub1/sub2/dub3
$ mkdir sub1/sub2/sub3
mkdir error: File exists!
$ mkdir -p sub1/sub2/dub3

--- page 31 ---

Copying, Moving and Renaming – cp, mv
cp copies files, mv – moves/renames:
cp and mv syntax
$ cp source destination
$ mv source destination
For copying directories with their contents the -r or -R (recursive)
option must be present.
The destination may indicate a new name or a new location.
✍In the first example somefile2 denotes a new name.
In the second one – somedir is a new location:
Copying a file
$ cp somefile somefile2
$ cp somefile somedir

--- page 32 ---

Symbolic Links and Hard Links – ln
Two kinds of file links do exist:
Two or more file system names that refer to the same file are
called hard links.
A file reference by its name, similar to Windows shortcut, is
called a symbolic link (or: symlink).
Symlinks are not automagically updated on file name change.
Hard links must exist within a single file system, while symlinks
can refer to files in other file systems.
Under normal circumstances only symlinks should be used.
ln creates hard links; ln -s creates symlinks. The syntax is as
follows:
ln syntax
$ ln [-s] target link-name(s)

--- page 33 ---

Removing Files and Directories – rm
rm removes files or directories.
If there are hard-linked names then rm removes single name
entries not the files they refer to.
For removing directories the -r or -R (recursive) option must be
present (obsoleted rmdir command can remove only empty
directories).
Other useful options include:
-i – prompt before deleting,
-f – never prompt, assume yes.

--- page 34 ---

Synchronization – rsync
rsync synchronizes destination directory to source directory. All
files in the source directory are left untouched.
rsync is able to synchronize directories between different hosts.
Typical rsync usage
$ rsync -avz --delete ~/sourcedir me@otherhost:/home/me/destdir
Options explanation:
-a – preserve standard file attributes,
-v – be verbose,
-z – compress during the transfer,
--delete – delete extraneous files from destdir.
The -n (or --dry-run) option starts rsync in pretend mode.

--- page 35 ---

File Comparison – diff
diff compares files line by line. diff -y (console or maximized
terminal window is recommended) displays results side by side
(in two columns). The symbols <, > and | denote respectively:
the lines missing in the first file, the second one and the lines
that differ.
diff (with no options) output shows modifications that turn the
first file into the second one. This output can be saved as a patch
file for the patch command (see the next slide).
✍file.patch stores information on how file.old
should be changed to be identical with file.new
Generating a patch file
$ diff file.old file.new > file.patch

--- page 36 ---

Applying diff Changes – patch
patch allows applying changes as described in a patch file:
Applying a patch
$ patch file.old file.patch
Reversing applied changes
$ patch -R file.old file.patch

--- page 37 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Manual
2 Session Utilities
3 Gathering User and System Information
4 File Viewing and Editing
5 File Management
6 Dealing with Archives
7 File Finding

--- page 38 ---

Compression: gzip, bzip2, . . .
Compression
$ gzip somefile1
$ bzip2 somefile2
$ xz somefile3
$ zstd somefile4
gzip, bzip2, xz and zstd compress files and add .gz, .bz2, .xz or
.zst extensions.
More than one file can be specified as an argument. In such case each
file is compressed separately.
Decompression
$ gunzip somefile1.gz
$ bunzip2 somefile2.bz2
$ unxz somefile3.xz
$ unzstd somefile4.zst
gunzip, bunzip2, unxz and unzstd decompress files and remove
extensions (.gz, .bz2, .xz or .zst).

--- page 39 ---

tar – Tape ARchiver
tar creates a single file (a tarball) being a concatenation of files given
as arguments:
Tarball creation
$ tar -cvf tarball.tar somefile1 somefile2 ...
Tarball extraction
$ tar -xvf tarball.tar
The options:
-c – create,
-x – extract,
-v – verbose mode,
-f – specifies tarball name (usage: -f tarball.tar).
Note that tar:
leaves source file(s) untouched,
doesn’t automagically add the extension: .tar while creating a
tarball.

--- page 40 ---

Compressed Tarballs
For multi-file archives we can first use tar then compress it with gzip,
bzip2, xz or zst:
Tarball compression with gzip
$ tar -cvf tarball.tar somefile1 somefile2 ...
$ gzip tarball.tar
Alternatively -z (for gzip), -j (for bzip2) or -J (for xz) options can
be used (for zst compression try: --zstd):
Creating compressed tarball
$ tar -czvf tarball.tar.gz somefile1 somefile2 ...
$ tar -cjvf tarball.tar.bz2 somefile1 somefile2 ...
$ tar -cJvf tarball.tar.xz somefile1 somefile2 ...
$ tar -xzvf tarball.tar.gz
$ tar -xjvf tarball.tar.bz2
$ tar -xJvf tarball.tar.xz

--- page 41 ---

Compressed Tarballs Under Windows
Most Windows archive utilities are able to deal with compressed
tarballs.
Windows utilities better deal with single extensions, so the
following ones may be more safe:
.tgz - for gzipped tarballs,
.tb2 - for bzipped tarballs,
.txz - for xzipped tarballs,
.tzst - for zst-compressed tarballs,

--- page 42 ---

Notes on Compression Formats
Gxipped of bzipped tarballs are historically considered
”standard”, ”traditional” Unix archive formats.
Unix and Linux archives are still commonly distributed as
gzipped of bzipped tarballs.
zst (formely: xz) is frequently used in Linux for compressing
kernel modules (*.ko.zst).
Pre-build installation packages are frequently distributed as
xzipped or zst-compressed tarballs.
Other compression utilities (arj, rar, zip, . . . ) may be available
but those are typically not included as core system packages.

--- page 43 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Manual
2 Session Utilities
3 Gathering User and System Information
4 File Viewing and Editing
5 File Management
6 Dealing with Archives
7 File Finding

--- page 44 ---

File Finding – find
find syntax:
$ find [path] [tests] [actions]
The parameters:
path – in which directory search for files (empty: the current one),
tests – search conditions; may be combined using logical
operators: ! , -a (and; default), -o (or) and parenthesis: ( ) ,
actions – actions to perform on files that meet the tests (empty:
print file names).

--- page 45 ---

find – Tests and Actions
Common tests:
-name – search by name (wildcards allowed)
-user , group – by owner and group (numeric values allowed),
-type – by type (f , d , l , c , b , . . . ),
-perm – by permissions (symbolic or numerical),
-mtime – by modification time (+n – more than n days, -n – less
than n days, n – exactly n days).
Common actions:
-print – print file names; the default one,
-delete – delete files,
-exec command ; – execute a command on files; for example:
-exec rm {} \; does the same as -delete (backslash protects
semicolon to be not interpreted by the shell).

--- page 46 ---

find – Examples
Search for relatively new configuration files.
$ find /etc -mtime -30
Move old backups to backup directory
$ find thisdir -mtime +365 -name "*.bak" -exec mv {} backdir/ \;
Delete some trash interactively
$ find thisdir -name ".*~" -exec rm -i {} \;