--- page 1 ---

Application Layer Protocols
Marek Kozłowski
Faculty of Mathematics and Information Sciences
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, 2023/2024

--- page 2 ---

Contents
1 Network Time Protocol
2 Telnet
3 File Transfer Protocols
4 HyperText Transfer Protocol
5 Mail Transfer Protocols

--- page 3 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Network Time Protocol
2 Telnet
3 File Transfer Protocols
4 HyperText Transfer Protocol
5 Mail Transfer Protocols

--- page 4 ---

Network Time Protocol (NTP, Mills)
NTPv4 specified by the RFC 5905 based on Mills’ work:
http://www.eecis.udel.edu/~mills/ntp.html
Now the same RFC describes Simple NTP (SNTP).
A commonly used, lightweight and portable SNTP
implementation is OpenNTPD (OpenBSD).
The full-featured and standard compliant NTP implementation
can be obtained from the NTP R&D Project website at
http://www.ntp.org (C sources).

--- page 5 ---

NTP – Synchronization
UDP port 123 (NTP/SSL – 563)
atomic clocks are used as time sources
servers that synchronize directly to atomic clocks are called
stratum 1 servers
numerous public stratum 1 servers or pools are available
NTP clients can act as NTP servers for other hosts (their
stratum is the source stratum + 1)
maximal allowed stratum value is equal to 15
NTP configuration file is ntp.conf, the daemon is called ntpd
and the client command is ntpdate

--- page 6 ---

Coordinated Universal Time (UTC)
NTP synchronization uses the UTC time which is
a high-precision atomic standard.
Due to irregularity of the Earth rotation the IERS
(International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems
Service) periodically introduces so-called leap seconds which
synchronize the UTC and the astronomical time.
UTC should not be identified with the GMT (Greenwich Mean
Time) which is a solar (astronomical) time.

--- page 7 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Network Time Protocol
2 Telnet
3 File Transfer Protocols
4 HyperText Transfer Protocol
5 Mail Transfer Protocols

--- page 8 ---

Telnet – Remote Shell
Standardized by the RFC 854–861 (1983).
Connections to the telnet server (TCP port 23) allowed remote
shell sessions.
Shell sessions were not ciphered; the unidirectional
authentication was based on a user name and a password.
RFCs 2941–2953 (2000) extended the telnet with cryptographic
mechanism.
Development of the SSH protocol marginalized telnet as a remote
shell session protocol.

--- page 9 ---

Telnet – Raw TCP Sessions
RFC 854:
The purpose of the TELNET Protocol is to provide a fairly
general, bi-directional, eight-bit byte oriented communications
facility
Telnet clients can be used for establishing raw TCP sessions to
other TCP-based services that don’t use encryption, for example:
$ telnet smtphost.somedomain 25
$ telnet webhost.somedomain 80
$ telnet ftphost.somedomain 21
(for debugging or impressing virginibus facilibus et formosis)

--- page 10 ---

RAW TCP Sessions over SSL/TLS
For SSL/TLS encrypted connections use (OpenSSL):
$ openssl s client -connect smtphost:465 -quiet
$ openssl s client -connect webhost:443 -quiet
or alternatively (GnuTLS):
$ gnutls-cli -p 465 smtphost
$ gnutls-cli -p 443 webhost

--- page 11 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Network Time Protocol
2 Telnet
3 File Transfer Protocols
4 HyperText Transfer Protocol
5 Mail Transfer Protocols

--- page 12 ---

File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
standardized by the RFC 959 (1985)
TCP transport
separate connections for the session (port 21) and for each data
transfer
sessions in form of ASCII string exchange:
command →
code and data ←

--- page 13 ---

FTP – Active and Passive Modes
Each data transfer can be in either active or passive mode.
Active mode:
connection opened by the server (port 20),
the client provides the port number in the PORT command.
Passive mode:
connection initiated by the client,
the server provides the IP and port numbers in response to the
PASV command.

--- page 14 ---

FTP – Selected Commands
Access control commands, for example:
USER, PASS, CWD (cd), REIN (reinitialize), QUIT
Transfer control commands, for example:
PORT, PASV (passive), TYPE
FTP service commands:
RETR, STOR, APPE, DELE, MKD (mkdir), RMD, PWD,
NLST (ls)
Note: Don’t confuse FTP commands with FTP client program
commands!

--- page 15 ---

FTP – Issues
Sessions to the port 21 idle during data transfer and therefore
may timeout on firewalls.
The active mode cannot be used if clients are behind NATs.
Sessions are not encrypted and there is at most unilateral
authentication – by username/password.
No data integrity check nor even the CRC checksum verification.

--- page 16 ---

FTP Secure
Any use of the FTP other than anonymous one is highly unsafe
– vulnerable to almost any attack.
FTP embedded into TLS/SSL (FTPS) can be used instead.
Securing FTP with TLS/SSL is described in the RFC 4217.
FTPS should not be confused with SFTP!

--- page 17 ---

SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP)
unrelated to FTP
developed by the IETF SECSH Working Group
usually implemented as a SSH subsystem
single sessions via TCP port 22 (SSH port)
currently not specified by any RFC

--- page 18 ---

Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP)
unrelated to FTP
standardized by the RFC 1350
UDP the port 69
extremely simplified:
no authentication nor encryption
no folder browsing
transferring files of size up to 32 MB
commonly used for boot image download during system startup
(with BOOTP)

--- page 19 ---

TFTP – Packets
There are only five TFTP packet types:
PRQ (read request) and WRQ (write request) that contain a file
name and a transfer mode (ASCII, binary),
DATA that contain 2-byte block number and 0–511 (the last
fragment) or 512 (more fragments exist) bytes of data (so called
block),
ACK that contain 2-byte block number; those packets
acknowledge receiving of DATA (any block must be acknowledged
separately),
ERROR that contain 2-byte error codes.

--- page 20 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Network Time Protocol
2 Telnet
3 File Transfer Protocols
4 HyperText Transfer Protocol
5 Mail Transfer Protocols

--- page 21 ---

HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
developed by IETF and World Wide Web Consortium1
TCP2 transport, port 80 (HTTPS – 443)
no HTTP sessions exist
subsequent requests matched (e.g. e-shopping) by cookies
1http://www.w3.org
2See the notes on HTTP3/QUIC on next slides.

--- page 22 ---

HTTP/1.x
Stateless request/response exchange protocol:
command →
code and data ←
HTTP/1.0 – request, reply, close.
HTTP/1.1 (RFC 2616) introduces so-called persistent
connections (response codes 100 and 101) which allow parallel
(pipelining) continued queries to retrieve additional page
elements.

--- page 23 ---

HTTP/1.1 Commands
Requests:
GET and HEAD (the only one required),
POST, PUT and DELETE (optional) – users should be noticed
(for example: pressing a button),
TRACE, OPTIONS (checking what requests are served) and
CONNECT.
Response codes:
2xx – success,
3xx – redirection,
4xx – request error,
5xx - server error,

--- page 24 ---

HTTP/2
HTTP/2 (RFC 9113) designed to optimize transfer:
headers can be sent in compressed (binary) form,
it is possible to prioritize page elements for download,
pipelining is replaced by multiplexing (query parallelism),
when the page is changed (updated), new data can be
automatically pushed to the client.
Messages are exchanged in form of binary messages (so-called
HTTP/2 frames).
For HTTP/2 without SSL/TLS version support requires prior
knowledge.

--- page 25 ---

HTTP/3
Next generation proposal by Google.
Standardized by the RFC 9000 (2022).
Experimental, limited or no support as of 2023.
Uses the QUIC transport:
a layer over the UDP (implemented in the userland rather than a
kernel level),
that eliminates head-of-line blocking,
with embedded TLS,
with connection migration (connections identified by CIDs rather
than IPs).

--- page 26 ---

Uniform Resource Locator (URL)
Format created for World Wide Web hyperlinks in 1991.
Identifies resources as well as their locations.
In 1994 extended to the URI (Uniform Resource Identifier)
format.
The most recent RFC document that describes URIs is the
RFC 3986 (2005).

--- page 27 ---

URL Format
scheme://authority/path?query\#fragment
scheme usually specifies the access (application) protocol (http,
ftp, ldap),
authority is a name or an IP, optionally preceded with
a username and a password: (user:password@address:port),
path is a path to resource (directory) delimited with ’/’,
query denotes dynamic program parameters, database queries
etc.,
fragment identifies resource fragments.

--- page 28 ---

Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)
URLs identify resources and locations. URNs (Uniform
Resource Names) unambiguously identify resource names in
some name space which are independent of physical locations, for
example: urn:ietf:rfc:3986.
URI is a generalized format that describes URLs, URNs and
so-called URI References (relative links).

--- page 29 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Network Time Protocol
2 Telnet
3 File Transfer Protocols
4 HyperText Transfer Protocol
5 Mail Transfer Protocols

--- page 30 ---

Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
standardized by the RFC 821 (1982)
simple, text-based mail transfer protocol
uses the TCP transport (not a strict requirement)
obsoleted by Extended SMTP framework (RFC 5321) that adds
e.g.
8BITMIME (RFC 6152) – binary files transfers
SMTP-AUTH (RFC 4954) – sender’s authentication
STARTTLS (RFC 3207) – SSL/TLS encrypted connections
the terms SMTP and ESMTP often used interchangeably

--- page 31 ---

SMTP Ports
SMTP ports:
25 – SMTP (obsolete),
465 – SMTP/SSL (unlike STARTTLS, the entire session is
tunneled inside SSL),
587 – submission port, recommended for sending mail (receiving
a shipment for a foreign MTA usually requires sender
authentication, see relaying).
Most servers accept client connections on all three ports.

--- page 32 ---

Secure Mail Transmission
ESMTP extension called STARTTLS may be used for secure
mail transfer. STARTLS uses standard ESMTP port.
Whole SMTP/ESMTP connections can be tunnelled via SSL
(port 465).
For receiving mail from SMTP clients using a special submission
port (587) is recommended. Usually those connections use the
ESMTP STARTTLS extension.
Many providers block their clients outgoing connections to the
port 25.

--- page 33 ---

SMTP Commands
Starting a session:
HELO – SMTP,
EHLO – ESMTP.
EHLO requires client’s FQDN as an argument.
The server responds to EHLO with a list of available extensions.
Basic mail transfer commands:
MAIL FROM:
RCPT TO:
DATA (ends with a line containing only a period)

--- page 34 ---

Sender and Recipient Addresses
The pair of addresses: MAIL FROM: and RCPT TO: is called an
envelope.
The shipment is processed based on the envelope.
The email header (which is an integral part of the email content,
i.e. DATA) may contain the fields from: and to: .
The address data from the envelope and from the header may be
different (this is not an error or incorrectness).
Most client programs display the sender and recipient based on
header data.

--- page 35 ---

SMTP Relaying
SMTP allows so-called relaying, that is using intermediate
SMTP servers (which act as SMTP clients).
If mail cannot be delivered to the destination SMTP servers are
obligated to send undeliverable mail notification3.
Before giving up several retry attempts are being made.
SMTP servers should not be configured as open relays, that
means that there should be administrative rules for incoming
(passing through) mail that protect form spam. Open relays are
usually blacklisted (placed on DNSRBL lists).
3It makes backscattering attacks possible.

--- page 36 ---

Selected Spam Protection Methods
RBL/DNSBL lists, e.g. cbl.abuseat.org , bl.spamcop.net ,
sbl.spamhaus.org4
ESMTP session control, e.g.:
EHLO: no FQDN, non-existent FQDN or false FQDN (rare case)
so called unauthorized pipelining
greylisting (’I’m busy now, retry after n seconds’)
relaying policies
checksum exchange networks, e.g. dcc or vipul’s razor
content analysis (regexp)
4See: https://mxtoolbox.com/blacklists.aspx

--- page 37 ---

Post Office Protocol (POP3)
protocol for fetching mail from inbox to a local computer
defined in RFC 1939
TCP port 110 (POP3/SSL – 995)
simple queue mechanism:
unidirectional mail transfer
no folder management
no selective fetching
new mail identified based on so-called UIDL (Unique
IDentification Listing) number

--- page 38 ---

Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP4)
mailbox management protocol
defined in RFC 9051
TCP port 143 (IMAP4/SSL – 993)
advanced mailbox management, e.g.:
bidirectional synchronization
support for many folders
search (server side)
selective transfers
commonly used by web mail access programs like SquirrelMail,
RoundCube or Horde
exemplary IMAP4 session:
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3501#section-8