--- page 1 ---

Processes and Signals
Marek Kozłowski
Faculty of Mathematics and Information Sciences
Warsaw University of Technology

--- page 2 ---

Outline of the Lecture
1 Processes
2 Signals
3 Process Tracing

--- page 3 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Processes
2 Signals
3 Process Tracing

--- page 4 ---

Processes and Programs
A process is an execution environment that consists of
instruction, user-data and system-data segments as well as
resources acquired at runtime.
A program is an executable (x permission) regular file containing
instructions and data which is used to initialize processes.

--- page 5 ---

Process Creation – fork
If a program calls the system function fork() the kernel creates
a new process (child) on behalf of the calling process (parent).
The instruction, user-data and system-data blocks of the child
are copied from the parent and only a few attributes change, so
the child process is almost an exact copy of its parent.
fork() returns child ID in the parent and 0 in the child (and -1
on error). Based on this value separate code blocks can be
executed in the parent and the child processes:
switch (id = fork
()) {
case 0:
child_work
();
exit ( EXIT_SUCCESS );
case
-1:
error_occured
();
exit ( EXIT_FAILURE );
}
parent_work (id);

--- page 6 ---

Process Creation (2) – exec
exec() system calls reinitialize the calling process from a
designated program file.
As a result of calling exec() the program changes while the
process remains.
fork() and exec() are typically used together to start a new
program.

--- page 7 ---

Process Creation – Example
The ls command is invoked from bash:

--- page 8 ---

init – First Process
init is the first process started after initializing the kernel.
Its process ID (PID) is equal to 1.
If a parent process terminates but its children are still running
they are adopted by the init process.
Note: under systemd Linux distros the init process is called
systemd !

--- page 9 ---

Zombies and Orphans
Each process can get its ID and parent’s ID by system calls
(getpid() and getppid() respectively) while the only way to
access children’s ID is to remember values returned by fork() .
When a process ends the SIGCHLD signal (see next section) is sent
to its parent. The parent process should then call the wait() (or
waitpid()) system call to obtain child’s exit status. If it doesn’t
the child is not executing but still exists in the process table. It is
called a zombie process.
init immediately waits all adopted zombies.

--- page 10 ---

Process Groups
Processes started by a single command (for example: processes in
a pipeline) are organized into a process group or job.
Generally processes are free to migrate to other groups or start
new ones (setpgid() or setpgrp() – depending on the system).
Process groups are used to control the distribution of signals. For
example: termination signals generated by Ctrl-C in terminal are
delivered to all processes within a foreground (see the next slide)
group.

--- page 11 ---

Sessions
One or more process groups can form a session.
Normally Unix shells create one session per login (except GUI
logins); login shell process becomes a session leader.
Processes cannot migrate to other existing sessions although they
can start new ones – setsid(), setsid .
A session can be assigned a controlling terminal (open by the
leader which becomes a controlling process). Granting terminal
access to distinct process groups (moving them to the
foreground / background) is referred as job control.
If no precautions are taken then terminating a controlling process
or hanging up a controlling terminal terminates all processes in
the foreground process group.

--- page 12 ---

Process Attributes – Summary
Process attributes (stored in system-data) include:
process ID (PID),
parent process ID (PPID) (for orphans: PID of the init, 1),
real user ID and real group ID,
effective user ID and effective group ID – different to the above
if the setuid or setgid bits are set,
process group ID (PGID),
session leader ID,
terminal.

--- page 13 ---

Process Tree – pstree
The command pstree shows running processes as a tree.
The -p option includes PIDs in parentheses after each process
name.
All orphaned processed are shown as children of the init process.
Note that names in curly braces are threads not processes
(identified by thread IDs)!

--- page 14 ---

Information on Running Processes – ps
ps prints statistics on running processes. Numerous display
options are defined; typically the ps -ef (full listing on every
process) is used.
BSD systems use different ps options and different syntax (no
dash precedes options). Under BSD the ps aux command is
commonly used for full listing.
What is the parent (PPID) of this bash instance?
$ ps -f

--- page 15 ---

Information on Running Processes – pgrep
pgrep combines ps and grep .
It takes a program name as an argument and prints PID(s) of
process(es) executing it on stdout.
pgrep in command substitution mode is commonly used when
some other command requires a PID rather than a program
name.
The command kill (see next session) requires a PID:
$ kill process ID
$ kill `pgrep program name`
Please note that the argument of pgrep is an ERE pattern to be
matched, therefore pgrep top will return PID of the xfdestop as well.
Use pgrep ’^program name$’ for avoiding ambiguity.

--- page 16 ---

Information on Running Processes – top
top displays dynamic, real-time information on running processes
including CPU (default sorting key) and memory utilization they
generate.
< and > keys change sorting criteria; q – quits.
Note that top causes relatively high CPU utilization itself.

--- page 17 ---

top – Screenshot

--- page 18 ---

Other top-like utilities
htop is an improved alternative task manager to top.
Other system statistics can be acquired by:
iotop – I/O (disk) utilization,
iftop – network connections,
ntop – network status.
All above utilities are not standardized, platform-dependent and
usually offered as optional software.

--- page 19 ---

/proc File System Revised
Any information on given process can be accessed via procfs file
system – in a form of files in the /proc/<PID>/ directory. The
files are system-specific, see man 5 proc of your system for
details.
Under Linux the following files may be available:
/proc/<PID>/cmdline – full command which started the process,
/proc/<PID>/cwd – symlink to the working directory,
/proc/<PID>/environ – environment variables for the process,
/proc/<PID>/exe – symlink to the executable file,
/proc/<PID>/fd and /proc/<PID>/fdinfo – file descriptors;
positions and flags,
/proc/<PID>/status – process statistics.
Later during this presentation we’ll show that the utilities like
pgrep, ps, pstree or top just parse above files.

--- page 20 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Processes
2 Signals
3 Process Tracing

--- page 21 ---

Signals
The simplest interprocess communication method. No data
except signal type is delivered to a process.
Notify about system event (for example: dividing by 0 generates
a SIGFPE) or can be generated by a process.
Kernel and root processes can send signals to all processes.
Non-root processes can send signals to processes running on
behalf of the same user.
Sequence of the same signals can be reduced to a single one.

--- page 22 ---

Signals (2)
Most Unix systems define approx. 28 signals.
Only two signals: SIGUSR1 and SIGUSR2 are left for user-defined
purposes.
Additional user-defined signals (SIGRTMIN to SIGRTMAX) are
introduced by the Real Time Signals POSIX extension. RTS
signals are discussed during Operating Systems and Unix
Programming however are beyond the scope of this course.

--- page 23 ---

Signal Handling
All signals except SIGKILL and SIGSTOP can be blocked, ignored
or intercepted and handled by a receiving process.
Blocked signals are postponed (not delivered to the process until
unblocked).
Ignored signals are not delivered to the process.
Signals which are not blocked nor ignored immediately interrupt
current process or function execution.
A signal handler is a short function invoked when receiving a
signal.
If no handler is defined then the default action is invoked (for
majority of signals: a process termination).

--- page 24 ---

Signal Classification
By origin:
natural – generated by some event,
synthetic – by calling a system call (usually: kill()).
All natural signals can be generated synthetically; SIGUSR1 and
SIGUSR2 signals can be generated synthetically only.
By default action:
terminate (and optional core dump),
stop/continue,
ignore – SIGCHLD to parent on child termination.
By related information:
error notification,
user / application generated,
process state change / job control,
timer.

--- page 25 ---

Error Signals
SIGFPE – arithmetic operation exception,
SIGILL – illegal instruction,
SIGPIPE – writing to a pipe with no readers,
SIGSEGV – memory segmentation error.

--- page 26 ---

Termination Request Signals
SIGTERM – default signal, polite request to terminate; sent to all
processes on system shutdown,
SIGKILL – unconditional, immediate process termination request;
can result in data lost or corruption,
SIGINT – generated by Ctrl-C in terminal,
SIGQUIT – generated by Ctrl-\ in terminal; same as SIGINT
except it creates a core dump,
SIGHUP – sent on terminal hang-up; commonly used for reloading
daemons.

--- page 27 ---

Sending Signals with kill
kill syntax:
$ kill [-SIGTYPE] <PID>
The command kill wraps the kill() which is the basic system call
for sending signals.
Any signal (even SIGCHLD or SIGFPE) can be send with kill. The
default one is SIGTERM.
Signals can be specified by name (-SIGKILL) or number (-9) .
kill specifies process by its PID. Other utilities that allow reference
processes by names may be available. Depending on the system
killall and pkill may be used.

--- page 28 ---

Signals and Terminal Control Sequences
Many signals can be send by terminal control sequences to
process in foreground process groups.
Note that control sequences may be remapped by programs,
especially those which use advanced terminal functions. For
example: nano uses Ctrl sequences for internal commands.
The most common control sequences are:
Ctrl-C – SIGINT, terminate,
Ctrl-\ – SIGQUIT, terminate with a core dump,
Ctrl-Z – SIGSTOP, stop (can be resumed, it doesn’t terminate nor
release resources),
Ctrl-D – sends end-of-file (EOF), doesn’t generate any signal.

--- page 29 ---

Terminating vs. Stopping a Process
Terminating a process results in calling exit() – aborting
process execution, releasing system resources and changing
process state to dead.
Stopping a process means freezing it. The process execution is
suspended but it remains alive and still occupies all allocated
resources. Stopped process can be resumed.
When discussing daemons (the next labs) the term stop is used
as a synonym of terminate. Yes, it IS confusing.

--- page 30 ---

Han Solo Receives a SIGSTOP Signal

--- page 31 ---

Background Processes
jobs displays status of all jobs in the current session.
Running a command with command-name & (following it by an
ampersand) starts it in the background.
Alternatively, if a process is running in the foreground it can be
stopped by <Ctrl-Z> and then resumed in the background with
the bg command.
fg places a job in the foreground.
If there are multiple jobs in the current session then bg and fg
require a job number as an argument – for a list of job numbers
run jobs .

--- page 32 ---

Outline of the lecture
1 Processes
2 Signals
3 Process Tracing

--- page 33 ---

Process Tracing
Most Unix systems provide tools for tracing and displaying all
system calls made by a process.
Process tracing may be especially useful for:
determining causes of freezes or crashes,
checking which configuration files and in which order are read by
a process,
identifying resource files utilized by a process,
reverse engineering (determining how it works).
Linux provides strace, other systems include ktrace (BSD) or
truss (AIX, Solaris)

--- page 34 ---

Process Tracing in Linux – strace
Tracing a process – typical usage:
$ strace [-f|-ff] [-o logfile] [-e what] [command|-p <pid>]
The options are as follows:
-f and -ff – include children processes (if any) for tracing,
-o logfile – log output to a file; if -ff is set then each child’s
system calls are logged to a separate logfile.<pid> file,
-e allows specifying which events to trace and how to trace them,
-p – attach to and trace a currently running process (by PID).
Regular users cannot trace processes of other users.
With strace it’s trivial to show that ps, pstree and top get process
information from procfs (/proc/<PID>/) files.